Suppose somebody were to tell you
that we had to reinterpret the Christian Bible
as follows:
you start with the premise that Jesus knew
what he was talking about
"therefore" Jesus could not have possibly
believed that the world was about to end
and he was having visions of (y'know) the
destruction of the city of Jerusalem (etc.)
well, that wouldn't really entail a "reinterpretation"
of the Bible
that would entail a rewriting of it
or a censoring of it,
or that you just ask people to ignore things
that are written in the bible,
on the grounds that "Well, Jesus couldn't
be wrong..."
"So... anything that's wrong, you're just
going to have to close your eyes to."
Now, there's a lot of nonsense in Christianity
but that would be shockingly simplistic, or
just stupid,
and I don't think Christians really even do
that.
(Sigh.)
Buddhism is definitely stuck at that stage
of the game.
You do deal with Buddhists telling you, with
no sense of irony,
"Um, look, the Buddha was very wise..."
"...therefore, it's impossible that he believed
in ghosts."
Therefore, all of the material about ghosts,
in the ancient writings, we, basically, should
selectively ignore.
Let me tell you, there's a lot of material
about ghosts.
Ghosts were a major concern, in ancient India.
(Sigh.)
Y'know, the last video I put up
that discussed just one issue, with Hercules
being contrasted to the Buddha,
some people will watch that and will know
right away what I'm talking about
because they've dealt with the problems that
are ongoing right now in the scholarship of
the religion
and other people will watch it and say, "Well,
what is this guy hinting at?"
Y'know I remember I got e-mail from someone
following up on an article I'd published
about issues surrounding the embryo and the
development of the fetus in the ancient writings,
in the ancient Pali canon,
those texts show an ancient world-view, they're
written by human hands,
unlike Christians or Muslims, Buddhists don't
claim that their texts are from a divine source,
they're written down by human beings,
and, uh, there's no reason for [Buddhists]
to believe that there's scientific accuracy
in these things,
[the texts] reflect what ancient people thought
about where babies come from [etc.].
Well, I remember I got an e-mail objecting
that, no, my interpretation of the text must
be wrong,
that it "logically" must be wrong,
because it doesn't meet up with the modern,
scientific notion of how pregnancy, gestation
and birth work.
Y'know, to me, that mind-set is so laughable,
it's so sad, it's so pathetic,
but for the people who are stuck in it, it's
invisible.
They're so emotionally wrapped up in this
business of imposing modern expectations on
the text,
of thinking "this must live up to this expectation",
[thinking,] "the Buddha that I see in the
text must satisfy my need for this religion
to be rational, scientific..."
or to reflect some other virtue, or reflect
some particular form of mysticism that they
ascribe to [the text].
It's sad, and I've seen it at all levels of
education,
I've seen it with, y'know, the village monk
who has only had a traditional education,
and I remember, in particular, one woman with
a PhD
presenting some of her PhD research
[her thesis] dealt specifically with ethical
consequences of action, and life-and-death
(etc.).
She managed to go through the whole presentation
without mentioning hell,
and I started to ask a question,
I didn't finish my sentence, dealing with
hell, during the question period,
[and] she basically had a nervous breakdown
on stage.
And, y'know, that's pathetic.
The term "cognitive dissonance" is over-used,
but you're looking at people who are so brittle
in clinging to their notion of what the text
"must" be
of what it "logically" must mean despite the
only evidence we've got
which is what that text says.
It would just be pathetic if there were people
around who claimed that
in ancient Greece "nobody" believed in hell
(Hades, as they called it),
[saying,] "No, no, no, you must re-interpret
these texts to reflect a modern, rational
view of the world."
I think that would be laughed at,
and, certainly, people would be regarded as
insane if they stood up in a formal, academic
setting, and presented those views,
but, man, in 2014, the discourse about Buddhism
is absolutely stuck at that stage.
People are expected to be taken very seriously,
when they sit down next to you at an academic
conference
and tell you that they are "interpreting"
a text on the assumption that the author was
omniscient
and "therefore" had a perfect memory of events
that happened 2,000 years earlier
and you're expected to sit there and take
it seriously when people tell you their supposedly
"scientific" and rational views of Buddhism
that, again, they're imposing onto the text.
So, when we deal with problems of "interpretation"
in Buddhism,
(ancient or modern)
sadly, what we're talking about isn't interpretation
at all.